---
ruleset:
  - 5th Edition Dungeons and Dragons
  - 2e AD&D
type: rules
Link: https://gist.github.com/petersgiles/ae202f22b007749f3a40c3ac52e70b55
tags:
  - DnD/5e
  - dnd/2e
  - conversion
  - rules
  - tools/gm
---
*Updated 10 February 2015 (added link to Monster Traits and Actions)*

This is the third in my series of conversion documents for D&D 5th
Edition. (You can find the one for Next
[*here*](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1EyewoKtrPU6_Ln7shlvC0MciILWHqYLdEVEQ2J4a6n4)
and the one for 3.5/3E/Pathfinder
[*here*](https://docs.google.com/document/d/15PDTkBoUBlAXVgzm9YCvRrMKTLKpCFyqwNVcoz05q9I/).)
I created this document by comparing the 5E versions of monsters from
the *Monster Manual* with their 2E counterparts. I also referred to two
sources for converting monsters from 2E to 3E: Wizards’ official
[*Conversion
Manual*](http://www.wizards.com/dnd/files/conversionbook.zip) and the
Dragon Magazine article “[*How to Create a
Monster*](http://creaturecatalog.enworld.org/cc/downloads/index.php)”.

I will once again include two warnings:

1.  If you compare the 2E and 5E versions of monsters yourself, you will
    > notice this conversion does not produce perfectly identical
    > results. I went for approximation, not precision.

2.  I am fallible, so there may be mistakes. If you find any, let me
    > know.

The end of this document also explains how to adjust these guidelines
for converting monsters from 1E.

You will need access to at least the [*D&D Basic
Rules*](http://dnd.wizards.com/articles/features/basicrules?x=dnd/basicrules)
and the *Monster Manual* to make full use of this. The *Dungeon Master’s
Guide*, while not strictly required, is highly recommended for its
monster creation guidelines (pages 273-283).

Also, thanks to Russ Morrissey for a simplification on dragon AC, and
the people in [*this ENWorld
thread*](http://www.enworld.org/forum/showthread.php?356524-Here-s-some-5E-monsters)
for general help!

***Challenge Rating***

Before you get started, you should choose an initial Challenge Rating
for the creature. This is an estimate of the monster’s CR, which you can
use to guide the rest of your conversion. There are two ways to do this:

-   Use the CR of a similar 5E creature. If you use this approach, the
    > creature should also serve as your “reference monster” (see
    > ***Ability Scores***).

-   Use the CR Estimator in Appendix 1 to convert its AD&D 2E XP Value.

When you are finished converting your monster to 5E, you may wish to
adjust this initial CR for a better fit. The best way to do this is to
use the rules for determining CR in the DMG, but if you’re pressed for
time, you can just compare it to similar 5E creatures once again.

***Size***

5E appears to use 3.5’s size ranges (slightly trimmed). These do not
perfectly match 2E’s size categories, so convert them as follows:

  **2E Size**                **5E Size**
  -------------------------- ------------------------------
  Tiny (2’ or less)          Tiny (2 feet or less)
  Small (2’-4’)              Small (2-4 feet)
  Medium (4’-7’)             Medium (4-8 feet)
  Large (7’-8’)              Medium (4-8 feet)
  Large (8’-12’)             Large (8-16 feet)
  Huge (12’-16’)             Large (8-16 feet)
  Huge (16’-25’)             Huge (16-32 feet)
  Gargantuan (25’-32’)       Huge (16-32 feet)
  Gargantuan (32’ or more)   Gargantuan (32 feet or more)

You can also simply use the 2E size category as is, if you don’t mind
being off by a few feet.

***Type***

2E did not have creature types, so you will need to assign those
yourself, based on the monster’s description. The types are all
explained in the 5E Basic Rules.

***Tags***

Appended to the creature type in 5E, these can be determined from the
monster’s description. Typical tags include **titan** (for creatures
like the tarrasque), **shapechanger**, specific types of fiends (such as
**demon** or **yugoloth**), and specific humanoid races (**elf**,
**thri-kreen**, etc.) If your creature isn’t likely to have any of the
tags above, skip this step.

***Alignment***

Generally, keep this the same. However, creatures in 5E may also be
**unaligned**, meaning they operate on instinct - so you may want to
change **neutral** to unaligned for some creatures.

***Armor Class***

It’s easiest to recalculate AC from scratch, based on their Dexterity
bonus and any armor worn. (Make sure to check the rules for determining
AC in the Basic Rules PDF.)

If the creature did not wear armor, and had an AC of 6 or below, they
should have natural armor. In that case, give them a +2 bonus to their
new AC.

**Dragons** appear to have stronger natural armor in 5E. For now, I
suggest estimating their 5E AC by subtracting it from 19.

*Example: A dragon of some sort has AC -1. Subtract that from 19:
19-(-1) = 19+1 = 20.*

***Hit Dice***

In 5E, the type of hit die is determined by a creature’s size. **Tiny**
creatures use d4 hit dice. **Small** creatures use d6 hit dice.
**Medium** creatures use d8 hit dice. **Large** creatures use d10 hit
dice. **Huge** creatures use d12 hit dice. **Gargantuan** creatures use
d20 hit dice.

In 2E, Hit Dice may be displayed in formats like “1-1” or “5+3”. The
first number is the number of Hit Dice; ignore the later number.

**Tiny** creatures should keep the same number of hit dice as they had
in 2E.

**Small** or **Medium** creatures should add **one** hit die. For
example, 1d6 should become 2d6.

**Large**, **Huge**, and **Gargantuan** creatures should add **two** hit
dice. For example, 3d10 should become 5d10.

Average hit points for creatures should be recalculated as follows:

Xd4 - Multiply X by 2.5 (round down), then add their Constitution bonus,
times X.

Xd6 - Multiply X by 3.5 (round down), then add their Constitution bonus,
times X.

Xd8 - Multiply X by 4.5 (round down), then add their Constitution bonus,
times X.

Xd10 - Multiply X by 5.5 (round down), then add their Constitution
bonus, times X.

Xd12 - Multiply X by 6.5 (round down), then add their Constitution
bonus, times X.

Xd20 - Multiply X by 10.5 (round down), then add their Constitution
bonus, times X.

*Example: A monster has 3d8 HD and a Constitution of 14 (+2 bonus). So
their average hit points are 4.5 times 3, rounded down: 13. Then you
multiply their Con bonus by their HD, for a total of +6. 13+6 = 19.*

Two exceptions:

**Oozes** should probably keep their current hit dice.

**Dragons** have been upgraded a lot since 2E, so any 2E dragon
converted like other monsters is likely to be comparatively weak. But
since we have only one example, I can only suggest you convert them like
other creatures of their size.

***Speed***

Use the 2E **Movement** stat, then convert it as follows for each
movement type (in feet).

**Movement up to 12**: Divide by 3, multiply by 10, round to nearest 10.

**Movement above 12**: Multiply by 2, round to nearest 10.

For reference, the 2E abbreviations for special movement are Fl
(flying), Sw (swimming), Br (burrowing), Cl (climbing), and Wb (moving
across webs).

*Example: A creature has Movement 9, Fl 21. Its new ground movement is
9/3 = 3, 3x10 = 30 feet. Its new flight speed is 21x2 = 42, rounded to
40 feet.*

A creature that can move across webs (Wb) should replace that speed with
the trait **Web Walker** (see Giant Spider in the *Monster Manual*).

***Ability Scores***

The only ability score provided in most 2E stat blocks is
**Intelligence**. You can use this statistic as given - if there’s a
range, go for the average or highest score. If only the Intelligence
“rating” is provided, use the below for reference:

-   Non- (0) \[which must be increased to at least 1 for 5E\]

-   Animal (1)

-   Semi- (2-4)

-   Low (5-7)

-   Average (8-10)

-   Very (11-12)

-   High (13-14)

-   Exceptional (15-16)

-   Genius (17-18)

-   Supra-genius (19-20)

-   Godlike (21+)

If you are really lucky, the monster’s description may describe other
ability scores. Use them as given if they are provided, with the
exception of **Strength**, which should be converted as follows:

  **2E Strength**       **5E Strength**
  --------------------- -----------------
  1-18                  Same
  18/01-18/99           18
  18/00 (2E ogre)       19
  19 (2E hill giant)    20-21
  20 (2E stone giant)   22-23
  21 (2E frost giant)   23-24
  22 (2E fire giant)    25-26
  23 (2E cloud giant)   27-28
  24 (2E storm giant)   29
  25                    30

For any ability scores missing at this point, you will need to choose a
“reference monster”. This is an existing monster similar to the one
you’re converting. (For example, a skeletal undead could use the
skeleton as a “reference”.) If you based the monster’s initial CR on an
existing 5E monster, you already have your “reference monster”!

Use the ability scores of the “reference monster” to fill in any blanks,
possibly tweaking them as needed to fit the monster’s concept or known
ability scores.

When choosing a “reference monster”, use these sources, in this order of
preference:

1.  The D&D 5E *Monster Manual*.

2.  Monsters from D&D Next material.

3.  D&D 3.5’s Monster Manual. You can use this site as a quick
    > reference:
    > [*http://www.d20srd.org/indexes/monsters.htm*](http://www.d20srd.org/indexes/monsters.htm)

4.  The “How to Create a Monster” article (linked above).

Note that in 5E, creatures always have all six ability scores. If you
use a 3.5 “reference monster” and it is missing any of these, you should
look at the next closest Next or 5E monster, or use the guidelines for
filling in blanks from my [*3.5 conversion
document*](https://docs.google.com/document/d/15PDTkBoUBlAXVgzm9YCvRrMKTLKpCFyqwNVcoz05q9I).

Alternatively, the 2E sourcebook *Dungeon Master Option: High-Level
Campaigns* provides a method for determining monster ability scores, if
you want to fill in the blanks from the 2E side. They recommend rolling
randomly and consulting a table, but I would use the average result on
the table instead (results 9-12). Another 2E resource to consider is
[**The Complete Book of
Humanoids**](http://www.dndclassics.com/product/16998/PHBR10-The-Complete-Book-of-Humanoids-2e).
Note that any resulting Strength scores would still need to be converted
to 5E.

***Saving Throws***

Ignore the 2E rules for monster saving throws. In 5E, saves are
associated with each of the six ability scores, so most creatures just
use their ability bonus for saves.

However, a few 5E monsters do appear to apply their **proficiency
bonus** to these saves. You may wish to do the same for your converted
creature, if their 2E description suggests it should.

In most cases, though, you should probably pass on giving your creature
proficiency with saves - it’s much easier without it.

***Skills***

The majority of monsters will have few or no skills, especially monsters
driven by instinct. Consult the 2E monster’s description to see if it
has any talents that might match a particular 5E skill. For reference,
the 5E skills are:

**Athletics** (Strength)

**Acrobatics**, **Sleight of Hand**, and **Stealth** (Dexterity)

**Arcana**, **History**, **Investigation**, **Nature**, and **Religion**
(Intelligence)

**Animal Handling**, **Insight**, **Medicine**, **Perception**, and
**Survival** (Wisdom)

**Deception**, **Intimidation**, **Performance**, and **Persuasion**
(Charisma)

Full descriptions of the skills can be found in the Basic Rules PDF.

If a creature has proficiency in a skill, their bonus with that skill is
equal to the relevant ability bonus, plus their **proficiency bonus**.

*Example: A monster has a Dexterity of 15 (+2 bonus) and proficiency in
Stealth. This means that they should have a +4 bonus with Stealth
(Dexterity) checks. If they are a more powerful creature, they may have
a +5 bonus instead.*

If a creature is hard to surprise, it should probably have proficiency
in Perception (Wisdom). If the creature is good at surprising enemies,
it should probably have proficiency in Stealth (Dexterity).

Some creatures seem to have a higher proficiency in one skill than the
others, typically double their normal proficiency bonus (+4 or +6). For
example, doppelgangers have a +4 on Deception (Charisma) checks. You may
wish to do the same with a creature’s “signature” skill.

***Vulnerabilities, Resistances, Immunities***

Look at the 2E creature’s **Special Defenses** and description - this
should give you an idea what the creature is vulnerable against (listed
under **Damage Vulnerabilities** in 5E), what the creature is resistant
against (listed under **Damage Resistances**), and what the creature is
immune against (listed under **Damage Immunities** or **Condition
Immunities**).

Some 2E creatures can only be harmed by magical weapons of a certain
bonus (+1, +2, etc.). This should be listed under **Damage Resistances**
as follows:

*bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from nonmagical weapons*

If the creature can only be harmed by some other material, add the
following:

*...nonmagical weapons that aren’t (silvered or adamantine or \[other
substance\])*

Modify the above as needed for other resistances.

When you note **Condition Immunities**, remember that they may overlap
with resistances or damage immunities. For example, a creature immune to
**poison** damage should also note that they are immune to the
**poisoned** condition.

The innate immunities of **undead** in 5E are:

*Damage Immunities: poison*

*Condition Immunities: poisoned*

Only add other immunities to an undead creature if they are separate
from its undead nature.

**Incorporeal** creatures should probably have the following resistances
and immunities:

*Damage Resistances: acid, cold, fire, lightning, thunder; bludgeoning,
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical weapons*

*Damage Immunities: poison*

*Condition Immunities: grappled, paralyzed, petrified, poisoned, prone,
restrained*

**Magic resistance** has also been simplified, and is now listed as a
trait - see the flameskull for an example.

***Senses***

There are only four senses established in 5E at this point:
**blindsight**, **darkvision**, **tremorsense**, and **truesight**. 2E’s
**infravision**, **ultravision**, and similar senses are equivalent to
darkvision. Any non-visual replacement for sight should be blindsight or
tremorsense. Any creature with innate “true seeing” should have
truesight.

Also, all creatures have a passive Perception score. This is equal to 10
plus their total bonus to Perception (Wisdom) checks.

***Languages***

Refer to the Basic Rules PDF for the known languages in 5E. If no
language for your creature is listed there, give them the native
language provided in their 2E description.

***Traits***

To determine a creature’s Traits, look at the 2E monster’s description.
When possible, you should use equivalent traits from the *Monster
Manual*; if this is not possible, either base the converted trait on a
similar 5E trait, or simply use the original text as is.

A list of the known Traits in 5E can be found
[*here*](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1MlpB4ayUq68oOhWR1kkYbCo2VA6kEKbaf0rtkp61_Ck).

**Spellcasting** is a special case. In addition to being used for 2E
monsters with levels in a spellcasting class, lists of spell-like powers
also tend to be translated as Spellcasting. (The only exception should
be specific spell-like powers which are really important to a creature’s
concept, in which case they are either listed as **Innate Spellcasting**
or broken out as individual traits, actions, or reactions.)

If the creature lists a caster level, use that. If no caster level is
provided, use their 2E Hit Dice. Make sure to use the 5E rules for
spellcasting, and replace spells with closest equivalents if necessary;
refer to the Basic Rules for more details. (For Innate Spellcasting, the
spellcasting ability is typically Wisdom or Charisma.)

***Actions with an Attack Roll***

Actions should be taken from a 2E creature’s normal attacks, **Special
Attacks**, or description. You need to convert three things to make
these into 5E actions - the “to hit” bonus, the damage inflicted by
elements of the attack, and any saving throws required.

A list of the known Actions in 5E can be found
[*here*](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1MlpB4ayUq68oOhWR1kkYbCo2VA6kEKbaf0rtkp61_Ck).

*To Hit*

Ignore the THAC0 and recalculate this from scratch. In 5E, the “to hit”
for an action is based on the **proficiency bonus**. This is combined
with the relevant ability bonus (usually Strength or Dexterity).

Note that most natural attacks (claw, bite, etc.) appear to be
**finesse** attacks, meaning they can use either Strength or Dexterity
with attack rolls. Unless you think your creature should be a weak melee
combatant, you should choose the highest of either Strength or Dexterity
for “to hit” with natural attacks.

Unusual attacks like the wraith’s Life Drain appear to either have a
higher bonus, or are using something other than Strength or Dexterity. I
don’t have any specific recommendations for this right now, but feel
free to experiment with other ability scores (like Constitution or
Charisma) if that seems appropriate. You’re probably safer avoiding
that, however.

*Damage*

In 2E, damage is often expressed not in dice, but as a range, like 1-6,
3-12, or 2-5. In such cases, you will have to figure out how many dice
that is before converting. (In the above cases, it’s 1d6, 3d4, and
1d4+1.)

For attacks that use a **weapon**, refer to the damage listed in the
Basic Rules PDF or Starter Set. If the creature is **large**, increase
the weapon’s damage die by **one** (i.e. 1d6 becomes 2d6). If the
creature is **huge**, increase the weapon’s damage die by **two** (i.e.
1d6 becomes 3d6). Some especially huge creatures, and **gargantuan**
creatures, may increase the damage die by **three** (i.e. 1d6 becomes
4d6), but you may be safer sticking with two.

For natural attacks by **tiny** or **small** creatures, you should
probably leave the damage dice alone. However, the minimum damage die
appears to be 1d4, so any weaker attacks should probably upgrade to
that. (The same goes for damage dice below 1d4 for other creatures.)

For natural attacks by **medium** or larger creatures, use the following
table:

  **2E Damage Dice**   **5E Damage Dice**
  -------------------- --------------------
  1d4                  1d6 (or 2d4)
  1d6                  1d8 (or 2d6)
  1d8                  1d10 (or 2d8)
  1d10                 1d12 (or 2d10)
  1d12                 2d8 (or 2d12)

If an attack inflicts more than one die of damage, increase the 5E
damage die by that number. For example, 2d4 should become 2d6 (or 3d4).

Some creatures’ strongest natural attacks seem to add both one die of
damage and increase the die type by one - for example, 1d6 becoming 2d8.
This should be used carefully, however, and shouldn’t be used on more
than one attack.

Don’t forget to add the monster’s Strength bonus to melee damage and
Dexterity bonus to ranged damage. You can calculate average damage
through the method above under ***Hit Dice***.

Other types of damaging attacks (like the flameskull’s fire ray) seem to
be treated much like the “strongest natural attacks” above, but there
aren’t many examples yet. Still, that guideline may work for now.
**Dragon** breath weapons are upgraded much more than that, but until we
have more dragons, I’m reluctant to recommend any guidelines there.

***Saving Throws for Actions***

5E saving throws are very different from 2E. They should probably be
converted as follows:

  **2E Saving Throw**                    **5E Saving Throw**
  -------------------------------------- -----------------------------
  Paralyzation, Poison, or Death Magic   Constitution
  Rod, Staff, or Wand                    Wisdom (or Dexterity)
  Petrification or Polymorph             Constitution (or Wisdom)
  Breath Weapon                          Constitution (or Dexterity)
  Spell                                  Wisdom

Feel free to substitute a different ability score for the save, if it
seems more appropriate.

You will need to calculate a **Difficulty Class** (DC) for the save your
creature inflicts. The usual way to calculate this is 8 + proficiency
bonus + the ability bonus of the creature for the relevant save. For
example, a CR 2 creature with Constitution 13 (+1 bonus) that inflicts a
Constitution save effect should require a DC of 11 (8+2+1).

The wraith’s **Life Drain** should be used in place of 2E’s **energy
drain** attack.

***Recharge***

Some actions also have a **recharge**. Two examples are the giant
spider’s Web and the young green dragon’s Poison Breath, which both have
a recharge of 5-6.

Recharge seems to cover strong effects that, in 2E, could only be used a
limited number of times per day, or required a number of rounds between
uses.

My recommendation is to use “Recharge 5-6” for most limited-use actions,
and keep “X per day” for especially strong attacks that should only be
used once in a battle.

***Actions without an Attack Roll***

Many 5E creatures - such as the doppelganger, flameskull, grick, nothic,
owlbear, and young green dragon - have **Multiattack**, allowing them to
take more than one action per turn. If your 2E monster could attack more
than once, you should probably give them Multiattack in 5E. Note that
most creatures can only make two attacks - the only exception is the
young green dragon, which can make three.

There are also a few creatures that can take actions not requiring an
attack roll or saving throw. If your monster could do this in 2E, you
can probably use them as is in 5E.

***Reactions***

Anything that could be converted into an Action, but requires some sort
of trigger, should be categorized as a Reaction. Otherwise, they should
be converted like other Actions.

A list of the known Reactions in 5E can be found
[*here*](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1MlpB4ayUq68oOhWR1kkYbCo2VA6kEKbaf0rtkp61_Ck).

***Final Notes***

Everything not mentioned above, like **Morale**, should probably be
dropped in 5E. Of course, if you feel it’s very important to the
creature’s concept, feel free to port it over anyway.

***Appendix 1: CR Estimator***

The below conversion follows a very broad comparison of the 5E CR and 2E
XP Value for the same creatures in both editions. It’s not perfect, but
it works as a rough starting point.

  **5E CR**   **2E XP**
  ----------- --------------
  0           7
  ⅛           15 to 35
  ¼           65 to 120
  ½           175 to 270
  1           420
  2           650
  3           975 to 1400
  4           2000
  5           3000 to 4000
  6           5000 to 6000
  7           7000
  8           8000
  +1          +1000

***Appendix 2: 1E***

While there were several underlying changes between 1E and 2E, the
monster statistics can be converted more or less the same as 2E
creatures. There are a few differences, however, which are mostly
cosmetic.

**Movement** rates are the same as 2E, but they are usually displayed in
the following format:

*\[normal\]”*

*/\[flying\]”*

*//\[swimming\]” *

*(\[burrowing\]”)*

*\*\[web\]”*

*@\[climb\]”*

1E only recognizes three **size** categories: **S** (small), **M**
(human-sized), and **L** (large). “M” is defined as 5-7 feet; “S” is
anything smaller than 5 feet; “L” is anything larger than 7 feet. If a
specific size in feet is given, you may use that number with the 2E size
conversion; if not, you will have to choose an appropriate size
yourself, based on the creature’s description.

**XP Value** is calculated differently from 2E. As such, if you want to
use their XP Value to determine their 5E CR, you cannot use Appendix 1’s
CR Estimator. Instead, use the following alternative table (ignoring the
extra XP per monster hp):

  **5E CR**   **1E Basic XP Value**
  ----------- -----------------------
  0           5 or less
  ⅛           5 to 20
  ¼           20 to 50
  ½           50 to 100
  1           100 to 200
  2           200 to 350
  3           350 to 650
  4           650 to 900
  5           900 to 1300
  6           1300 to 1700
  7           1700 to 2100
  8           2100 to 2500
  9           2500 to 3000
  10          3000 to 3500
  11          3500 to 4000
  12          4000 to 4500
  13          4500 to 5000
  14          5000 to 5500
  15          5500 to 6000
  16          6000 to 6500
  17          6500 to 7000
  18          7000 to 7500
  19          7500 to 8000
  20          8000 to 9000
  21          9000 to 10,000
  22          10,000 to 15,000
  23          15,000 to 20,000
  +1          +5000

(Note that the original 1E *Monster Manual* does not provide XP Values
at all; you have to refer to the 1E *Dungeon Masters Guide*.)

**Psionic Ability** is listed for many 1E monsters (as well as a smaller
number of 2E monsters). Psionics rules are beyond the scope of this
conversion, but you may wish to import any described psionic powers as
Innate Spellcasting (see the Mind Flayer for an example), or as other
traits, actions, or reactions as appropriate.

FYI, the 1E [**Monster Manual
II**](http://www.dndclassics.com/product/17005/Monster-Manual-II-1e) has
a list converting the damage ranges (2-8, etc.) to dice rolls, which may
come in handy for both 1E and 2E conversions.
